Good stuff.
Well, over the last few weeks, I'm David, by the way.
I don't know whether we introduced ourselves, and that was Adam.
Did we introduce ourselves?
I'm not sure.
We're two carried away in chocolate.
So I'm David.
I'm one of the pastors here at Life in Yard.
Nicola is looking after six to 11 this morning, and we have the joy of leading Life in Yard Church and have done for what soon will be 20 years in September, which is crazy.
We've been looking at a series of last couple of weeks called Unshakable.
And we've been thinking about the life of Daniel and his friends.
And John in the first week looked at the whole idea of resolve, how Daniel and his friends had real resolve in their faith.
And John encouraged us to build resilience and resolve in our faith too.
and it helped us to think around what that can look like.
And then last week, Nicola talked about rhythms, how Daniel had rhythms, how he prayed three times a day, and that we need to build rhythms in our life that will help us to abide more in Jesus.
And she suggested three things, prayer, scripture, and worship as three rhythms we can build into our life to help us abide more in Jesus.
And if you want to kind of have a listen to those, they are on the podcast.
If they're not on yet, they'll soon be on the podcast and they'll also.
be on YouTube.
We've shifted the way we do YouTube just for a little while.
If you want to watch the YouTube actual whole service, then you need a link, so you just need to let the office know.
But the talk itself will be cut out and put on the YouTube channel over the next week or so.
So if you're looking for the live stream, it's not where it used to be, just so you know.
But just let us know if you want the link.
Cool.
Right.
I want to really also highly recommend you read the book of Daniel.
You know, we are literally spotlighting certain little bits to make some points around this series.
But I would really encourage you to read the book of Daniel, to read it from start to finish, to really engage in the story of Daniel and his friends, because it is a remarkable story.
Yeah, towards the end it gets more into the prophetic.
but it's just worth the read, and I think it would really help you as we dive into the life of Daniel and his friends.
So have a look at that.
And I'm gonna pick it up today with this idea that Daniel and his friends were a witness, a witness to the greatness and the glory of God.
And we hear this word witness quite a lot on the TV, don't we?
You know, we might see it on the news,
This person was a witness.
We might watch TV dramas, crime dramas where we talk about witnesses.
I watched, well, re-watched Broadchurch.
Anybody watched Broadchurch?
Yeah, yeah.
With Worth a Watch.
It's Worth a Watch.
David Tennant, Olivia Coleman, set on Devon Coast somewhere.
And they kind of investigate, of course, they do a murder.
And the first series is all about
them trying to track down the murderer.
They kind of explore, they find the evidence, they find witnesses, and then they catch the murderer.
And then the second series is kind of different because it follows the same story, because normally they find the murderer that's it.
But the second series is all about the trial.
And the witnesses kind of come forth and give their evidence.
And a little spoiler alert, the guy who we know is the killer, actually,
please innocent, and the story is about, is he gonna get found guilty?
It is fascinating, and then these people come forward and they give a testimony, they give a witness to what they've seen and what they've heard.
In the Old Testament, the English word that is translated witness is actually translated from the Hebrew word, and I always get it wrong, but I'm gonna give it go, ed, or ed, which speaks of a legal
covenantal context.
And when you think about the fact that the Old Testament had 613 laws, certainly that's the number I came up with, it's understandable, isn't it, that their relationship with God had this element of covenantal sort of, almost legal sort of interaction.
And so this, their word for witness is, is Ead, E.D.
If you follow these rules, if you follow these laws, then you will be right.
You will be righteous.
It's kind of the context.
However, the New Testament, we see that the religious leaders and the teachers of the law clashing a lot with Jesus about the law.
Just take the story of Jesus healing on the Sabbath.
The Pharisees accuse Jesus of working on the Sabbath.
He kind of healed this person.
And the teacher's law were kind of angry with him.
How dare we break the law, the rule?
And Jesus answered them with a question.
Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill Mark 3.4?
You see, the Pharisees and the teachers of the law had become focused on the letter of the law.
And Jesus was trying to open their minds and their hearts to the spirit of the law, actually open their hearts and their minds to the one who set the law to God and to his character.
Of course he would heal people no matter what the time, because he loves them.
The God they were called to obey and to follow.
And so when we read the word witness in the New Testament, it is translated from the Greek, Greek words, martyrs or martyria, I think is how you pronounce it.
And these have a much more personal meaning.
They speak to the call for each of us to be a witness.
We are to give a verbal testimony to the gospel, but our lives must be a living testimony.
See, Jesus called us beyond the law into relationship with Him.
And because of that, we are to be His witnesses in what we say and what we do in how we act and with our attitudes.
Acts 1, 8, it reminds us, doesn't it?
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, engineer and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.
You'll be my martyrs, my materia.
But rather than a witness being a matter of following the rules in the New Testament, being religious, Jesus sums it up like this, Matthew 22.
Jesus replied, love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.
This is the first and greatest commandment.
And the second is like it.
Love your neighbor as yourself.
All the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments.
See, Jesus moved this call to be a witness
from a legal, covenantal context of the Jewish people, especially the Pharisees and the teachers of the law, to a fuller, more personal understanding that is captured by Beth this idea that we worship a loving God and we're called to love people, that that's at the heart of everything that God tells us to do.
The Apostle Paul writes this, Romans 12, 1.
Therefore, urge your brothers and sisters in view of God's mercy to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice.
You could say a living witness.
Holy and pleasing to God, this is your true and proper worship.
So Paul speaks of a living sacrifice, a practical expression of what it means to be a witness of Jesus and the gospel.
And it's hardly surprising when you think about the Greek word for witness,
that the Greek word for witness and martyr is the same.
So martyrs is the Greek word which we translate to mean martyr.
So martyr and witness come from the same root.
So Stephen was stoned.
He was the first martyr.
He was also, you could argue,
the first witness, he gave an account for his faith and he stood firm on it and he would not deviate from it and so they stoned him to death.
He became a martyr for his witness.
He refused to compromise.
So being a witness, a follower, as a follower of Jesus is far more than this idea of giving evidence in a courtroom.
It's not just given an answer.
You know, the gospel in three points.
That's not
what it's about.
It's part of it, but it's not what it's about.
Now Jesus in the New Testament demonstrates and teaches us that to be a witness requires our whole life.
Everything we do and think, and of course everything we say.
And when you read the Old Testament, you realize this has always been the way.
This has always been the way God has seen it.
and wanted his people to behave.
So that leads us back to Daniel and his friends.
So firstly, they gave a verbal witness.
Daniel 3 16 to 18 says this.
We do not need to defend ourselves before you in this matter.
If we are thrown into the blazing furnace,
The God we serve is able to deliver us from it.
And we will deliver, and sorry, let's try that again.
Slow down, David.
If we are thrown into the blazing furnace, the God we serve is able to deliver us from it.
And he will deliver us from your majesty's hands.
But even if he does not, we want you to know your majesty.
I love their manners, that we will not serve your gods.
or worship the image of gold you have set up.
The context for this is that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are before King Nebuchadnezzar because they refused his command to worship a massive golden idol.
The king offers them one last chance to obey.
And this is their defiance, yet respectful and faithful response.
They gave an account, an answer.
And so I want to just
look at three parts of their response, three elements of how they replied to the king.
Firstly, we do not need to defend ourselves before you in this matter.
You know, when you think about giving an account or an answer for the faith that we have, the hope that we have, and that's taken from 1 Peter 3.15, always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have.
It's easy to fall into the thinking that we almost need to apologize for our beliefs, for our faith.
You know, the world in which we live has set up so many golden idols and calls people to worship them, set up so many beliefs and ideologies and expects everyone to believe and agree with them.
And as followers of Jesus, when we stand our ground as Christians, we can feel the pressure of these idols.
and these ideologies that surround us every day and the temptation to stay silent.
Or to apologize, I'm sorry yet, I do believe something a little bit different.
I'm sorry about that, I know it's different from the rest of the world, but you know, we start to apologize, make excuses.
Or even worse, we compromise our faith to fit in.
What we see with Shadrach Meshach and Abednego is a conviction.
a confidence in what they believe.
They are not arrogance.
They're not judgmental.
Oh, you've got it all wrong.
You know, King Nebuchadnezzar, you know, you're such an idiot.
You know, why are you putting these gold?
None of that.
They're polite, they're respectful, but they know what they believe.
And they're confident in their conviction and their faith.
They calmly and firmly speak out and say, we do not need to defend ourselves.
I love a good debate.
And many theologians and other writers speak into what we might call Christian apologetics.
And apologetics is rooted in the Greek word apologia, which is translated in One Peter as answer.
The challenge we have is that apologetics can become Christians trying to justify their faith.
And that's not what it's about.
Even apologizing for our faith.
The Greek word apology, it does not mean saying sorry.
It describes a reasoned response and answer.
This is what I believe.
This is what truth I stand on.
This is the God of worship.
This is what is done for me.
It doesn't matter what you think.
This is what I think.
And I'm confident in what I believe.
And these godly men simply said, no, we're not worship idols.
We're only going to worship God.
What a worship set.
I mean, we don't actually, I mean, maybe we should more, but we don't actually talk about what songs we're going to have in the worship set.
We trust the Lord will kind of inspire.
And those songs about our God reigns, it could not have been a better set of to think about this topic, this theme.
Our God reigns, that's basically what they were saying to King Nebuchadnezzar.
Our God reigns.
and therefore we're not going to worship any idols that you built.
They didn't go into the history of the Jewish people.
This is how we've been.
This is how it all came about.
Moses got this and this person got that.
And none of that, they didn't talk about the theology of idols and the danger of worship and other things.
None of that.
They just simply said, look, no, we worship God and that's the only person we worship.
Do with us what you will, we're not gonna change our minds.
We won't apologize for our faith.
So neither should we.
Next, they say this, the God we serve is able to deliver us from it, the blazing furnace, our God reigns.
Their response is grounded in their fundamental belief that God is on the throne.
I had actually written that in my talk before we sang the songs.
That God is on the throne.
That God is in control.
King Nebuchadnezzar might think is in control.
Those kind of calling out idols and ideologies today might think that they are in control.
But the only one that's in control is God.
God created all things.
God will decide when Jesus returns.
God will bring judgment on all.
And redemption to those that believe God is in control.
So Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego again simply answer the king by saying, the God we serve is able to deliver us.
Now when we face challenges to our faith, pressure to compromise and worship idols, to pull out, to kind of take hold of worldly ideologies and depart from God's truth, when we face the potential impact of standing firm on our faith,
We must remember that God is in control.
He is able to deliver us no matter what the circumstances.
So in their apology, their response to the king, they calmly, respectfully, unapologetically stood firm on their beliefs and stated clearly that God is in control.
Do you believe that?
She believed that God is in control of all things.
Next is one of the most challenging statements I think in scripture.
Bear in mind that they were about to be placed into a blazing furnace.
Probably stood in front of it.
But even if he does not, we want you to know your majesty, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of God you have set up.
This is profound.
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego are saying, look, we don't worship God because of what we will get.
Our faith is not based on what God does for us.
We worship God because of who He is and not because of what we might get.
So even if He doesn't deliver us, we will still worship Him.
Just stop and let that sink in.
If God never answers your prayers, if God never delivered you from the challenges you face, if God never provided for your needs, would you still worship him because he is God?
He sits on the throne and those four creatures surround him and those 24 elders surround him and they lay their crowns down before him and sing holy, holy, holy is the Lord.
Will we worship him just because of who he is?
no matter what he does for us.
And in this story, we see that that's exactly what these three men do.
They say, even if he doesn't, even if he doesn't save us from the furnace, we are not going to worship anyone else or anything else.
How profound is that?
Of course, this is paradoxical, isn't it, in a way?
Because God's character is such that he is love, and he loves us and cares for us.
He promises to meet our needs, and he promises to answer our prayers, not always in the way we expect or hope, but he says he loves us, and he's with us, and he meets us, and he tears down walls, and he breaks chains, and he does all of those things.
No, the paradox is this, that they would have worshipped Him anyway.
They knew what their God was like.
They knew His character, but they were still worshiping even if He didn't come through in the way they'd hoped in this situation.
What is our faith like?
What is our witness like?
Is our witness dependent upon what God does for us?
Do we get up in the morning when we've had a good day?
And God's provided and go, he is the one true God.
But when we're like, where is God in this?
Do we start to have doubts and think, oh, maybe God isn't who he says he is.
These guys said, no matter what he does, we're not worshiping anything else.
He is the one true God.
Will we stand firm on our unshakeable faith, no matter
what the outcome.
You see, we don't need to be a theologian to give an answer to the hope that we have.
We may not have that kind of answer.
We may not be able to tell people about the history of this or that or the original Greek or Hebrew and all of those kind of amazing apologetics that some amazing theologian and writers tell us about.
But we can all do this.
We can all know that we do not actually need to defend our faith.
We don't need to try and prove our faith to anyone else.
We just tell people that's what I believe.
I believe in Jesus, end off.
We can trust that God can deliver us and we can be confident in that, that he can change our circumstance, provide for his answer, our prayers.
We can give a witness, we can speak up of God's amazing provision in our lives.
And we can also powerfully say, but even if he doesn't, even if he doesn't change that circumstance, even if my life is going to be really tough in this season, I'm still going to worship him.
What a powerful witness that is to the world, that it's not transactional.
Our worship isn't based on what we get, it's based on who he is.
That's a powerful witness right there.
We don't need to be theologian.
Sometimes we keep our mouth shut because we're worried that we might say the wrong thing.
We don't need to have clear answers, theological arguments.
We just need to have unshakable faith.
So firstly, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego demonstrate the importance of a verbal witness.
Secondly and quickly,
Oh, actually, we're not doing too bad.
We see Daniel, the importance of being a living witness.
So Daniel 6, 4 to 5.
At this, the administrators and the satraps tried to find grounds for charges against Daniel in his conduct of government affairs, but they were unable to do so.
They could find no corruption in him because he was trustworthy and neither corrupt nor negligent.
Finally, these men said, we will never find any basis for charges against this man.
Daniel, unless it has something to do with the law of his God.
Your actions speak louder than words.
It's true.
I have a number of books on, well, my bookcase and bookcases here at church that have been written by Christian leaders who have since been found to have been abusive or had extramarital affairs often
when publishing these books.
On one level, what they've written is still true.
See, he's still quite good stuff.
That's why we bought the book in the first place.
But you can't help but open it and look at it and know that their testimony is tainted, has been distorted by their behaviour, by their abuse, by their affairs.
It has damaged their witness.
It has silenced their voice.
Let me read this again.
Now this, the administrators and the satraps tried to find grounds for charges against Daniel in his conduct of government affairs, but they were unable to do so.
They could find no corruption in him because he was trustworthy and neither corrupt nor negligence.
I'd love to spend more time on this first, you know?
This is like some of the richest stuff from a discipleship perspective.
But let me make two quick points.
To be a witness, our life needs to be above reproach from the world's perspective.
To be a witness, our lives need to be above reproach from the world's perspective.
And to be a witness, our lives need to be above reproach from God's perspective.
I just want to add quickly into that.
None of us are ever going to be perfect.
We're all going to fall short, the glory of God.
But we need to try to be above reproach from God's perspective.
These two statements highlight this comprehensive integrity required to be an effective living witness.
To be above reproach from the world's perspective means that our conduct is to be so honest, so trustworthy, you know, negligent free, not
Mistake free, we kind of all make mistakes, but that we are conscientious in our work.
We do our best to do everything well.
We work at all things as they're working for the Lord.
So much so that even those who oppose our faith, when they go looking, there are no skeletons in our cupboards.
There's no things they can accuse us of.
Now this integrity in our daily life, at work, in our finances, in our public dealings,
validates our verbal testimony.
However, this outward integrity must be rooted in being above reproach in God's perspective.
We must be right with God, which is a deeper internal standard involving our motives, our attitudes and our hearts and the things we do in the secret place.
Ensuring that witness is not about self justification, look how great I am.
or me a rule following, oh yes, this is what my religion tells me to do.
But a practical, holy expression of our love of God.
Both standards are necessary, has hypocrisy, writing a book and actually abusing people when nobody's looking.
The hypocrisy, a life below, you know, that is actually
People are able to judge and convict us of things that we've done wrong.
From the world and God's perspectives, we'll ultimately distort and taint the message being proclaimed.
We can't speak truth if our life doesn't live the truth that we're speaking about.
What we find in the life of Daniel Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego is that these values haven't
order of importance.
Their life was above reproach from the world's perspective until the requirements of the world, the idols and ideologies contradicted their commitment to and worship of God.
At that point, at this point, they made a stand.
It was at this point the rubber hits the road and they face lions and furnaces and persecution, but God delivered them.
We must understand that our life is a living witness 24-7.
And we occasionally find that we have the opportunity to witness with words.
Now, we often don't we think about witness as the words.
If somebody stands on the witness stand and they speak words, this is what I saw, this is what this person is like, and it's words.
For us as followers of Jesus,
It's our actions and our attitudes and our behaviors that give us the right to speak.
Our actions speak louder than words.
Our actions attitude lifestyles integrity.
It's like we plug our words into a speaker system.
It amplifies what we say.
Because people see our lives and go, yeah, that's exactly how they live.
That's how they speak.
That's how they treat this person.
You know, they do really care for the least and the lonely.
They do really support those who are in need.
They do really love each other.
This is how you know that you're my disciple by the way you love each other.
So you're my disciples because they love each other.
Our actions, our attitudes, our behaviours, our integrity, honesty, our diligence, all of that speaks volumes to a world and then occasionally we get to speak.
words to give an answer for the hope that we have.
How's your witness?
Should we just take a minute to think about that?
And while all those that have a faith in Jesus are thinking about it, I just want to talk to anyone here that maybe
has come and you don't know Jesus.
Jesus came.
He lived a perfect life.
He was above reproach in every level.
He did not sin at all.
And yet he chose to die on a cross in our place so that we could be forgiven.
We do all fall short of the glory of God.
We all need the forgiveness of Jesus, his blood to wash away our sin.
And so if you're here this morning and you've never invited Jesus into your life, you've never had that sort of knowledge that you are forgiven, set free and you have the hope of eternity with him, that you will be in heaven with Jesus sat on the throne.
If you don't know that, then I'm just going to pray a quick prayer and then we're going to have just a couple of minutes of ministry.
So if this is you, you never invite Jesus and you would like to, then just echo this in your hearts with me.
Father God, I thank you so much that you sent your son Jesus, that he was above reproach, that there was no, nothing could be said against him.
He was perfect in his actions, in his attitudes, in all that he said and all that he did.
And yet he chose to die in our place on a cross for our sin.
And Jesus, I thank you that you have forgiven me.
I say, sorry for the stuff I've done wrong.
Sorry for the times I've gone my own way.
Done my own thing.
Would you forgive me?
And I choose now to follow you, to try and live a life of a living witness, to honor you in everything I do and everything I say in all my actions and all I speak.
Holy Spirit, would you come into my life and give me the strength to live the way you want me to live?
Amen.
If you've echoed that in your hearts for the first time, that's what it means to be a Christian.
That's the first step.
Now is the time of learning to be, to imitate Jesus, which is a lifelong adventure.
But that moment is you entering the kingdom of heaven.
But I just wanted to take a minute before
We just finish.
If we are a follower of Jesus already, how is your witness?
How is your witness?
How is your secret place?
How do you treat your wife and your husband, your children?
How do you behave at work?
Do you cut corners?
Do you find ways out of things?
Do you go above and beyond?
How is your witness?
It's uncomfortable.
It's an uncomfortable conversation.
But if we are going to be witnesses, ambassadors for the kingdom of God, then we need to take an audit of our lives.
So I really want to encourage you this week and the notes are going to come out up.
We send out these weekly devotions just to reflect on this talk and they're going to be coming out probably tomorrow morning, ready for Tuesday to Saturday.
And we're going to focus on that probably more on your life, being a living witness.
So if you'd like to kind of dig into this a little bit more and just take some time to reflect on it and really encourage you to engage with those devotional notes this week.
Because this kind of isn't a ministry moment.
It's not a let's pray for each other.
It's a let's take an audit of our lives and put things in place to change.
And the one last thing I just want to really encourage you to do, and it's hard because we've got a lot of people who are wanting to do it.
And so we're playing catch up with trying to get things in place, but the spiritual growth plan is designed to help you make some changes in your life.
So you might need to be a little bit patient as we get people to do this kind of meet up with you.
But you can grab a little card from the back and just fill in another survey online that will then trigger us to get somebody to reach out to help you journey through change and become more like Christ.
So how's your witness?
Shall we make that the question of the week?
Oh, man.